Persia now called Iran is a fascinating
[Music] country it has been a major power
since before the foundation of Rome and
even since the dawn of civilization and
it still shapes today the politics
of the Middle East and Eurasia
right in the middle between Europe and Asia it's
been a major Center of Trade learning and cultural
exchanges it is also a remarkably durable Center
of power always re-emerging no matter how many
times it got invaded or conquer this documentary
will delve deep into where Persia comes from and
what made it so successful and unique among
the world's great civilizations [Music]
the area of modern-day Iran in historical Persia
has been inhabited since early prehistory it also
saw some of the earliest agricultural villages
in 7200 BC notably choga Golan and choga bonut
in the zagross mountain in the west of the region
and forming the Western border of modern day Iran
we know from these sites that wild barley lentils
and various legumes were cultivated we also found
a 7,000 yearold jar of wine now on display at
the University of Pennsylvania the culture of
the region has been deeply intertwined with one
of Mesopotamia or Curr day araq one of the first
cities the Sumerian city of Oro is considered
to have EX ended Eastward creating the city of
Souza in 4395 BC or maybe even earlier the city
of Souza would become the capital of Alan the
very first defined nation and what would become
Persia it would stay an important economic and
Trade Center until its destruction by the Mongols
some 5500 years after its foundation instead of
a modern nation state Alam was most likely a
coalition of different people and tribes living
in the mountain Alam was the name given to them by
the Mesopotamian civilization and they most likely
call themselves something like halami or those
of the High Country this defined characteristic
of the Persian people the people of the mountain
would stay and it would contrast the people of
the plain to the West in modern day Iraq the two
would often fight and at times dominate each other
the rough terrain was not suitable for the
irrigation heavy type of Agriculture practice
in the plane so life was most likely structured
around semi-nomadic pastoralism with smallscale
Agriculture and a limited area along the bottom of
the valleys this Made For Less numerous but also
rougher harder people than the more sophisticated
farming culture of the plane so in many ways the
Iraq Iran conflict in the80s was just the last
episode in 6,000 yearlong conflict between the
plane people and the mountain people and who would
dominate the area little is known about alam's
everyday life because we're still not able to
translate their writing which started from around
3200 BC the elamite language now extinct seems to
have been a completely different language from any
other from the region however progress has been
made recently to decipher elamite writing so
we might soon learn a lot more about them a unique
feature of elam's culture was a focus on animals
and their art especially dogs and Bulls this was
very different from the samarians acadians or
Egyptians who favored human or animal human hybrid
figures ilite art indicates a polytheist religion
with a strong focus on nature and a mother goddest
with rituals done in sacred Groves or mountains
this was also a very tolerant religion religion
that tolerated the gods of its neighbors and even
progressively Incorporated them into the elamite
pantheon some aspect of their religion was passed
upon the later religion in Persia notably Zoro
asterism for example using Elevated Places for
worship or the personification of deities of
natural Powers another interesting aspect of
elamite culture was a great respect for women they
are represented as as equal in art and queens are
shown as equal to the king this cultural trait
would be preserved later in the position of women
in Persian Societies in an earlier era Elum was
frequently invaded by its more powerful Neighbors
From The Plains which was more populous thanks to
highly advanced irrigation systems in fact Elum
is the loser in the first ever recorded War With
The Invasion and looting by the Sumerians of elim
in 27 00 BC Souza would also be under Sumerian
control under the rule of the legendary Sargon
of aod but nothing last forever and by 1100
BC Elum was the rising power in the region
King shutruk nunti went on a series of Conquest
rolling over most of the cities around Babylon
later Alam would stay powerful but would fail to
rule the region due to infighting between the are
of king shutruk the king of Babylon Nebuchadnezzar
would in turn conquer Alam in 1120 BC illustrating
the difficulty in obtaining a lasting victory
in the region we know Alam was trading with the
whole Known World and not just its neighbors
we found in Souza plenty of artifacts from
the Hindus valley civilization in modern day
Pakistan we also found objects from Eastern
Iran and Afghanistan showing the existence of
an active Trade Network both by boat and by land
Afghanistan was also one of the major sources
of tin an essential metal to make bronze the
most advanced metal of the period no doubt Alam
must have been involved in that trade and maybe
resold tin from the East to the Mesopotamians or
even the Egyptians they were also selling Stone
metal and wood that was lacking in the more
desertic Plains crossed by the Tigris euph
river system this trading Road would keep getting
more and more important and slowly involved in
the Silk Road connecting Europe to Asia with
Persia as the Connecting Point between the
two progressively alam's power faded with the
entry of the Iranian or Aryan people into the
region they were Nomads who originated from the
steps of Eurasia living a life similar to Proto
slave Apes Turks and Mongols over time Elan and
Iranians started to mix especially in the south
of the country this was a gradual process
that stretched over more than a millennium
starting in 2000 BC elamite culture would
persist long after the Iranian people became
dominant in the region for example the ilite
language was for a long time used as the main
administrative language this would indicate
that if the Iranians rule and colonized the
area the legal and administrative system was
still manned by native elamites one of these
Iranian groups the mes started to Federate
the region under the banner of the first real
Iranian Emperor Dees who were fined from 727
to 675 BC according to herodias to give you
an idea the highly embellished tales of the
300 Spartans fighting Persia were from Herod
is so while important dicese might not have
actually been the ruler of the whole of Iran
in any case the M's unification was in large part
a reaction to the brutal conquest and oppression
by the Assyrian Empire Di's grandson zarz would
Ally with the Babylonian and destroy the capital
of the Assyrians Nineveh in 612 BC by 700 BC the
area was mostly populated by Iranian people like
the mes Persians and parthians the mes might have
been the founder of the first Iranian Empire and
the downfall of the Assyrians but it would be
another group that would take the lead of the
region the Persians under Cyrus the Great would
form the first Persian Empire also called the aate
Empire Cyrus the Great was a vassel
of the mes that rebelled in 553 BC
and then went on to conquer the world
by 539 BC he had conquered Babylon in
533 BC he would enter in India
and conquer the western part of
it we don't know much about him before he went
on overthrowing the mes and taking over the whole
Middle East it seems he started his Rebellion
when a me's General harpagus was sent to attack
Cyrus but instead Cyrus and harpagus teamed up on
the mes Empire how did that happen what did Cyrus
promise harpagus no one really knows as the
stories of the time including from Herodotus
are too full of Mythology and inventions to
be relied on but we know that later harpagus
would become one of Cyrus's top generals who
knows maybe harpagus saw early in Cyrus the
Great ruler he would become so what made Cyrus
the great first he unified the Iranian people
into a structured and stable Empire he created
a central Administration with Governors called
satraps most of the Contemporary sources agree
that they managed their domain efficiently to
the benefit of the Common People it also helped
that satraps were regularly checked by the king's
eyes a network of spies reporting directly
to Cyrus the Empire also had four capitals
reflecting a large level of autonomy for each
region still the center of the administration
was at Susa the old elamite Center of power
it relied on an advanced post system where
couriers would always find fresh food water
a bed and horses at a maximum of 2 days of
travel the system Cyrus created would be kept
almost identical by successive Empires and invader
until the Muslim conquests a millennium and a half
later his influence on legal work has reached so
far in time that Thomas Jefferson read Cyrus's
biography by zenapin the pyropia as one of the
sources of inspiration for the United States
Declaration of Independence secondly he's the
king that conquered Babylon in 539 BC and allowed
the Israelites to leave Babylon where they were
enslaved for the Hebrew Hebrew Bible this was a
task Cyrus had been appointed to by God himself
this made Cyrus the only non-jewish figure in
the Bible praised as a messiah third Cyrus was
known to respect the culture and religion of the
people he conquered he is considered by Iranians
as the father he was considered by Babylonians as
the Liberator which says a lot about his style of
ruling compared to the old Babylonian Elite fourth
he was the founder of the famous military division
of the 10,000 men called The Immortals which would
stay the Elite Force of the Persian Empire to the
end overall as far as conquerors go Cyrus was
indeed a pretty good one he created what at the
time was the largest ever Empire and did it with a
relatively limited amount of Bloodshed and sparing
civilian and local temples his son would continue
the tradition and Conquer Phoenicia and Cyprus in
525 BC followed the same year by the conquest of
Egypt Nubia and part of modern day Syria to this
day the Empire founded by Cyrus is the largest
of all the successive Iranian Empires the tomb
of Cyrus the Great Is Still Standing in Iran and
is a UNESCO world heritage site Cyrus's greatest
city pepolis is to this day one of the greatest
archaeological sites in the world following
Cyrus's son came Darius I the other great Persian
Emperor darius's reach would ultimately extend
as far as an invasion of the Hindus Valley
today Pakistan but he is more remembered for
the first Persian invasion of Greece in 492 BC
bad luck would strike with the lack of troops
coming partly from a fleet sunk by a storm and
by the fact that the invasion of Greece was a
really small campaign by Persian standards so The
Invasion would fail at Marathon and 490 BC due to
a mix of bad luck and insufficient troops angered
by the Greeks resistance and surprise Victory
Darius had planned a second invasion but he died
in 486 BC before he could execute it leaving the
task to his son Xerxes Xerxes is management of
Persian troops in the Greek campaign was average
at best and by now the repeated Persian invasions
had forced the often divided Greek city states to
unite still he managed to burn Athens and 480
BC which had been evacuated by its population
the Battle of Salamis in 480 BC would see the
Greeks destroy the Persian Fleet fearing being
stuck in Europe Xerxes retreated he also had to
put down a rebellion in Babylon at the same time
the remaining Persian troops on the continent were
finally defeated at the Battle of platea in 479 BC
Xerxes would end up assassinated in 465 BC by the
commander of the royal bodyguards the Greeks and
the Persians would keep fighting for influence
over Anatolia and the Greeks islands for the
centuries to come with none really taking over
the other after Xerxes Persia would stay one of
the largest world powers for almost centuries one
of the impressive features of the Persian Empire
would be its effort to improve the conditions of
the semiarid region after all it receives only
124 mm of water per year notably Darius the great
would create the shashar hydraulic system a system
of canals that would divert water from a river to
the city of shushtar power multiple Mills create
a man-made Cascade and irrigating almost 100,000
acres of farmland and Orchards another remarkable
system predating the Persians but greatly expanded
by them was the kets they would take water from
underground and carry it to fertile farmlands
these canals were mostly Subterranean in order
to limit evaporation because they tapped into
the water tables it would provide a small but
steady water flow independent of the rain
the conid would also be immune from damage
from war or flood providing an extremely durable
infrastructure to the inhabitant of the Persian
Empire building a conid was a difficult task as
you needed the canal sloped downward to let the
water flow but not too steep or water would
start eroding the canal and collapse it they
also made a unique footprint on the landscape as
vertical tunnels were dug at regular intervals to
give access to the workers during the construction
and for maintenance another ation was the yako a
dome of clay where Persians would pile up ice and
winter to keep food cold the rest of the [Music]
year there are also claims that it is the
Persians we have to think for the invention
of the cartar the ancestor of the modern guitar
another entertainment popular to this day is
back gamon the oldest surviving board game the
Persians also claimed have also invented chess
even if this is contested by India the Persian
culture and day-to-day life Incorporated a wide
array of regions and cultures for example slavery
was relatively common in the areas of Babylon and
Egypt with a long history of slavery predating
Persian rule but overall it seems slaves were
just a minor portion of the society and slavery
was not a key component of it less than in Greece
or later in Rome for Persian women benefited
from a remarkable amount of Freedom by Antiquity
standards they could own by themselves land
businesses and money they could also travel freely
we also know that aristocratic women would ride
horses and practice archery activities that would
have been kept only for men in other cultures like
the Greeks the only field apparently excluding
women was ruling the country one last Innovation
to be credited to the Persians is one of the first
monotheist religions Zoroastrianism the religion
was founded by zoroaster or zarathustra the exact
figure of zoroaster is lost to history with
religious tradition putting him in the 6th
Century BC but some historians believe him to be
more of a 10th Century BC figure turned into a
myth Zoroastrianism explains the world as a place
of a battle between a supreme god of good versus
a supreme god of evil it also contained belief
in Free Will life after death and Theology of
Angels and Demons Heaven and Hell historians
of religion consider that Zoroastrianism had
a major influence on other abrahamic religions
Buddhism and Greek philosophy one example is the
three Magi bringing gifts for Christ's birth
in the Bible also known as the three wise men
the term Magi refers to Zoro asrian priests in
in Zoroastrianism the god of good is omniscient
knows everything but not omnipotent cannot do
everything Zoroastrianism also encouraged the
protection and to some extent the veneration of
nature probably drawing from the older animist
and polytheist beliefs of the Iranian people
and the elamites fire was playing a major role
in the religion with prayers usually done in the
presence of a fire and sometimes flowing water
the zoroastrian idea of the law of Asha or
truth and righteousness was also claimed as
an inspiration for Cyrus the Great style of
ruling and lawmaking even if he didn't impose
Zoroastrianism on the people conquered by Persia
Zoroastrianism is still practiced today as a minor
religion in India and Iran overall the Persian
Empire seems to have been a relatively tolerant
and good one as far as Empires go it would punish
rebellions harshly but then respect the local
culture customs and religions of the conquered
people its governing principles were autocratic
but with a goal of improving the common man's
life and developing a just and productive system
run by an efficient Administration with many
safeguards against corruption and abuse of power
[Music]
Persia was a brilliant civilization that
contributed to the progress of mankind
as seen in more enlightened laws women's rights
irrigation systems and new religions what Cyrus
the Great and Darius the great built would
be brought down by an equally great conqueror
the Macedonian Alexander the Great Alexander was
a great admirer of Cyrus reading from an early
age zenfan coped Dia one key aspect Alexander took
from Cyrus's biography was his heroism in battle
Alexander was the king of Macedonia a kingdom at
the northern fringes of the Greek world he was
born in 356 BC and tutored personally by Aristotle
yes the Aristotle the father of Western philosophy
Alexander was already commanding an army and
ruling in his father's absence at 16 years old
and then he became king at only 20 years old
his father Philip of Macedon had United under
one Banner the Greek city Zira the modern-day
Balkans and thce modern-day Bulgaria and Eastern
grece Philip was assassinated in 336 BC by the
captain of his bodyguard similar of the fate of
xeres more than a century earlier the beginning
of Alexander's rule showed he could be ruthless
he had one of his cousins and two Macedonian
princes executed whether they were responsible
for the assassination of Philip or not is unsure
what is sure is that it made his position in the
throne very secure Alexander would also brutally
put down any Rebellion tively following the
death of his father it culminated when he made an
example of Thieves destroying the 1,000-year-old
city in 335 BC and selling all of its citizens
into slavery sparing only pro- macedonians and
Priests maybe out of genuine guilt or to appease
his critics Alexander would later on always show
great generosity and favor to any surviving Thon
he would meet in person in any case it worked at
crushing any rebellious ideas in other Greek
cities including Athens Alexander would follow
by imitating philli and taking the title of Heman
or Supreme Commander in these early moments of
his Reign Alexander would display a real military
genius he would stay undefeated in battle all his
life making him one of the greatest Generals in
in history Alexander invaded the Persian Empire
in 334 BC with around 50,000 men 6,000 Cavalry
and a fleet of 38,000 men he would conquer the
western part of Anatolia modern day Turkey which
was populated by Greeks but living under Persian
Rule and then move on to Syria and the levand the
Greco Macedonian army met the much more numerous
Persian army at least twice bigger at the Battle
of ES the Persians were led by Darius III and he
had cut the Greeks from the conquered territories
a big part of the legend of Alexander has been
enhanced by the sheer ineptitude and cowardice
of Darius III at the Battle of esis in 333 BC
the Persians attacked the Greeks in a narrow
space between the sea and Mountain blocking
them from making use of their larger number when
the Persian army started to break under a Greek
assault led by Alexander Darius is said to have
been the first one to flee the view of the Persian
Emperor running for his life instead of rallying
his troops led to the Persian army collapsing
this was the first time ever that a Persian army
under the command of a Persian Emperor would be
defeated one can imagine the shock it must have
been to everybody even Alexander himself Darius
left behind his wife his two daughters and
even his mother as well as symbols of of his
authority like his bow Chariot and Royal mantle
the female relative of Darius would be treated
well but Alexander would refuse to give up on his
hostages except for Darius recognizing him as the
Emperor of Persia later on Alexander would marry
one of darius's daughters in order to reinforce
his claims on the throne Alexander would go on to
put Siege to The Phoenician Tire now modern-day
Lebanon to punish it for its resistance he would
destroy the city in 332 BC kill the men and sell
the women and children into slavery Gazo would
then resist as well and even seriously wound
Alexander in the shoulder the city would then
suffer the same fate as Tire after that the
whole of Egypt surrendered quickly many cities
named Alexandria would be founded in the wake
of the conquest but the Egyptian Alexandria would
go on from its foundation and 331 BC and become a
major Trade Center and place of learning harboring
the Lighthouse of Alexandria as well as the Great
Library 2 years after the battle of esis Darius
would flee again at the Battle of gamela in 331
BC this was despite once again commanding a
larger army fighting on a favorable terrain
this time and having competent and experience
experienced soldiers and commanders he apparently
again fled first way before any clear winner
of the battle could be decided from there the
Persian Empire would never recover the rest of
Persia fell right after with Darius unable to
successfully raise a full third Army the fate
of the previous two must have made volunteers
quite rare in addition the benevolence of
Alexander to places that surrendered made
it an attractive option at this point and his
brutality against tyer and Gaza made it a Bad
Bet to resist too hard as well Alexander's
military genius should not be dismissed as
he showed real prowess in his campaigns to
keep control over his vassals since he was
16 years old his ability to wield both diplomacy
and horrific brutality also contributed to his
lightning quick conquest of the largest Empire in
the world but a part of his astonishing success
also stemms from darius's cowardice not once but
twice did he single-handedly cause the route of a
Persian army twice the size of the Greeks by
leading the way to safety quite the contrast
with Alexander which would constantly refuse the
advice of his generals and lead the battle from
the front line this extreme level of risk taken
by Alexander also had a huge impact both the Greek
and Persian armies were an assembly of soldiers
from very diverse and not always very loyal vassal
States when the Greek soldiers fought with
Alexander they didn't fight for the glory of
Macedon a state and culture many of them actively
disliked they fought for Alexander himself who
they had come to admire at a personal level for
his courage and in Reverse when the soldiers from
Egypt or Babylon saw Darius fleeing they hadn't
much interest in fighting and risking their
lives for a cardly Emperor many historians have
tried to justify the fall of the Persian Empire
as something almost inevitable they describe the
Persian Empire as divided tired and declining but
this can be contested the Persian Empire managed
not once but twice to gather an army twice the
size of the Greek army it was not weakened by the
previous rebellions or Civil Wars there was very
little defection by local rulers to Alexander
overall the Persian Empire seems to have been
still a very functional well- administrated
Empire the Persian Empire might have fallen
solely because of the extraordinarily unlucky
combination resulting from the clash between two
very different men Darius III a poor excuse of
an emperor and Alexander a once in a millennium
military genius by Conquering the Persian Empire
and uniting it with Greece and Macedon alexand had
created the largest empire ever seen the end of
the campaign would' see the Greek pillaging pilis
for several days in 330 BC a fire intentional
or not started in the palace and burned down
most of the imperial capital it could have been
revenge for the burning of acropolis by xeres or
just an accident apparently Alexander regretted
it but it was already too late to stop the fire
the relationship of the Greeks with the Persians
was a strange one a bitter rivalry and centuries
of War but also mutual respect each recognizing
the other as civilized in a way something the
Greeks did not extend to many other people plutar
tells us that Alexander paused by looking at a
statue of exercies and asked the statue shall
I pass by and leave you lying there because of
the Expeditions you led against Greece or shall I
set you up again because of your magnanimity and
your virtues in other resp ects Alexander would
end up hunting Pretenders to the succession of
Darius third all over Central Asia in modern day
Turkmenistan Afghanistan and Tajikistan seemingly
always Restless Alexander would decide to try and
invade India next in 326 BC the first battles were
successful but this would be one step too far the
men were at this point tired of war and wanted to
go home and profit from the SPO Spoils of Victory
ultimately the soldiers faithful to Alexander
were an open Revolt they would still obey him
and defend him but conquer no more Alexander
would be back in the old elmite city of Susa
in 324 BC during the campaign Alexander started
to try to build his legitimacy as a Persian
emperor in the eyes of his new subjects this
led to tensions between his Greek troops and
him one remarkable example is when Alexander
drunk would end up killing a friend that had saved
his life previously the deadly fight started over
accusations that Alexander had become corrupted
by an oriental lifestyle another issue was how
to integrate the Greek and Macedonian veteran with
the Persian officers the initial mixing of command
helped giving Persian troops to Greek officers
and the other way around he also notably tried a
wave of mass marriages between his officers and
Noble women of Susa the now Persian old elamite
capital this would not have durable effects when
finally settling back he started to put in order
to the administration including executing several
satraps that had proven themselves corrupt or
disloyal shortly after he came back to Persia
Alexander died suddenly in 323 BC the likely
cause was a fever caught in a nearby swamp but
of course previous attempts and his position led
to speculation about poisoning there are dozens
of theories about his death none conclusive some
would find it somewhat poetic that a man able to
bring down an Empire and survive countless battles
and injuries would not fall from Intrigue but an
ordinary and UNG glorious cause like a disease he
would be buried in Alexandria but what happens
to his remains is unclear past the 2 Century
ad conquest of Persia by Alexander would have
lasting consequences when Alexander was on his
deathbed his generals pushed him to name who the
throne should be granted he would have responded
to the strongest this led to the fracture of the
empire in four Macedon and Greece thce in the west
of Anatolia Persia proper with Central Asia Iran
Iraq Syria and Lebanon and Egypt which also ruled
over part of the levent Cyprus and South Anatolia
the fragments of Alexander's Empire would stay
under Greek control or influence for most of the
next three centuries this period is referred to as
the helenistic period the local population would
actually not see their life Changed by much it was
mostly the aristocracy that changed into fully
Greek or a mix of Greek and Persian or local
culture a good example is the tmy dynasty started
by General tmy they would rule uninterrupted
until Roman times basing their power and Military
recruitment on Greek colonists but also adopting
local Customs the last member of this dynasty
would be Cleopatra the lover of Julia Caesar
ending the tum rule with her death in 30 BC this
heniz would later see the rise of a Greek Empire
in Central Asia the Greco Bactrian Kingdom which
ironically would be the last surviving Kingdom
directly and culturally related to Alexander's
Conquest so far from Greece the Persian Empire
soon turned into the cusd Empire named after
Alexander's General sucus the sald would be in
a bitter rivalry with toic Egypt it would fail
to hold on to the territory west of the indis
river and settle it as a natural border with the
Indian Moria people the ucid would try to expand
Westward into Greece but would be defeated by the
Greeks in the Roman Aly lies this would weaken
the empire and open it later to conquest by the
parthians the cusd would turn out unable to hold
on to their empire with their most lasting Legacy
being the heniz of the region that same process
pushed by a stream of an immigrant from Greece
would ultimately weaken the empire with notably
the Jewish population successfully revelling by
the time of Christ the Greek language would be
used for language of learning trade and culture
the first Bible would be written in Greek as
[Music] well in the near East in Iran the
Greek influence would slowly fade away with
a progressive return towards Iranian and zero
asrian ideas the bans in Central Asia would turn
out to be the last standing helenic Kingdom with
a culture mixing Greek Heritage in Buddhism also
called Greco Buddhism it is from this region that
Buddhism spread toward China the parthians were
an ironic nomadic people living in modern-day
Turkmenistan not on like the mes and Persian
before them they were ruled by the cusd through
Greek satraps until they rebelled and took over
the Empire the one to accomplish that was mith
rat's first the great he started wars in the East
to control the Greco bactrians in 155 BC and then
occupied the indis valley and wars in the west to
try to w expand into Greco Roman territory this
follows a now familiar pattern in Persian history
first there are some natural geographic features
a center of power always based around Modern Day
Iran and trying to expand East towards Central
in India and West towards the Levant in Anatolia
competent Emperors manag to expand bad ones see
the Empire Contracting when a dynasty really
weakens it gets replaced by nomadic Invaders
first the mes then the Persians and then the
parthians for each Nomad Invasion the pre-existing
bureaucracy and lifestyle mostly stay unchanged
except maybe for the elite the parthan empire was
no exception it is during this period that a full
synthesis of Greek and Iranian culture would occur
and one good example of it is the cult of Mithra
later on Mithra would be a strong inspiration
for the cult of mithas by Roman legionary
this cult would be competing with Christianity
as a possible successor to the traditional Roman
pagan gods it was inspired by Mithra but also
Incorporated a lot of other influences including
beliefs in astrology and divination it was also a
sort of secret society inside the Roman army with
multiple levels of initiation and secret hierarchy
a sort of Marshal Freemasonry going back to the
parthians a unique feature of the parthians was
a ruling system that was a lot less autocratic
it was aristocratic in the sense that only the
elite had a say in the ruling of the country
but the nobility could decide to depose an unfit
King by a vote without the Empire devolving into
a civil war alternatively even powerful Nobles
could be demoted or arrested by the king without
troubles as long as the decision was deemed fair
enough this gave Parthia a high level of political
stability something of an advantage against the
always divided Greeks and the Romans experiencing
regular and devastating Civil Wars Parthia would
be a bitter rival to Rome constantly blocking its
expansion Eastward parthan mounted archers would
be a new core for the Persian Empire Army keeping
alive the steps tradition more than the previous
nomadic Invaders their most memorable tactic was
the parthan shot a backward Arrow fired at
the pursuing enemy Cavalry in one especially
remarkable military campaign the parthians would
be responsible for the defeat and killing of crus
the third member of the triumvirate with Caesar
and pompe they killed him in 53 BC by making him
swallow melted gold in punishment for his
legendary greed the sesanian Empire would
be the last Pagan as in non Muslim iteration
of the Persian Empire the best way to look at
the sesanian replacing the parthan is by looking
at the origin of the founders of the Dynasty and
their ideology they were from an old Persian Noble
family from the same region that Cyrus the Great
came from the Empire they built from 224 ad would
put back Iranian culture at the center of Persia
with Zoroastrianism turned into a state religion
helis Iz ation would partially stay but be much
weaker in Iran than in the fringes of the Empire
like in the near East neighbors such as Lebanon
and Israel other religions would be tolerated
but this characteristic would be essential in
distinguishing this new Persian Empire from
the Roman Empire now turning into a Christian
Empire later on the sesanian would be the most
dangerous and threatening rival to the Eastern
Roman Empire also called the Byzantine Empire
it is during the cian Empire that the Jewish
Babylonian tmid would be composed as the Empire
harbored several Jewish centers of [Music]
learning the cians saw the rise of manism created
by the prophet Manny it was a religion claiming
to be the final Revelation synthesizing the
teaching of zoroaster Jesus and Buddha as a
result it angered the hierarchies of all the
main religions of the time manism would spread
quickly even if repressed by the sesanian Empire's
leadership but would be ultimately crushed by the
various governments in the west China and the
caliphates and Disappear Completely by the 14th
century it would nevertheless be very influential
on many Gnostic branches of Christianity like the
cathars this is sonian Empire would also be a
lot more centralized and urbanized compared to
the parthan culture more influenced by nomadic
Lifestyles the sesanian Empire would develop
relations with the East further than the previous
Persian Empire since the Bronze Age trade with
India and China had created a prosperous Trade
Network the Silk Road it took its name from The
Invention of silk by the Chinese in the fourth
millennium BC and the beginning of its trade
out of China from the time of the Persian Empire
the cenan and Chinese would also exchange artists
like musicians and dancers and they cooperated
in defending the Silk Road from the everpresent
threat of nomadic pillagers from the center of
Eurasia they would also take over the trade with
the Indian Ocean kicking out the Romans from
it the sesanian Empire is often described as
the height of classical Persian culture and
a lot of their philos phos ophy architecture
style literature and Engineering would later
be considered Muslim by foreigners as the cian
style would be exported to the whole Muslim
World they might have even invented the very
first electric battery the so-called Baghdad
battery it was a pot with a metal component
inside able to generate electricity similar to a
AAA battery and we have no idea what it was used
four just when Muhammad was preaching Islam
and federating the Arab tribes the sesanian and
Byzantine Empires had been fighting a multi- deade
war of attrition against one another a plague
known as the plague of shuro also caused a lot
of damage in 627 BC invasions by Turkish tribes
reduced the military capacity of the sesanian
Empire as well the weakening of the state for
the wars had an especially dramatic effect on the
sesanian Empire when the sesanian king KRA II was
killed by his rival a civil war erupted with up
to 10 people claiming the throne the Civil War
lasted 4 to 5 Years From 628 to 632 ad just when
the Civil War had ended the Arab Muslims attacked
and invaded Mesopotamia it was repelled but then
a second attack in 636 ad took from the sesanian
control of all of the land west of modern-day
Iran in 642 ad another attack started and the
Empire would fall less than 10 years later the
Persians would Rebel and attack Arab Governors
and garrisons But ultimately their resistance
would be crushed by reinforcements from the Arabic
Peninsula the Conqueror would burn zero asrian
sacred text and force conversion on the local
population many would flee and form the ancestors
of the current day zoroastrian communities in
India and elsewhere in Asia non-muslims would
have to pay a heavy tax called the gizia and
could be enslaved nevertheless it would take
until the late middle age for Islam to become
the dominant religion in Iran this conquest of
Persia by Arab Muslims was almost replicated
against the Byzantine Empire at the same time
the resulting rashidan caliphate would control
all of the Middle East including Iran Egypt
Libya Syria and Mesopotamia as well as parts
of Central Asia the relationship between Persia
and Islam is complex on one hand Islam has been an
imposed religion on the Persians who resisted Mass
conversion for centuries on the other hand Persian
culture has heavily influenced Islam itself this
is especially true for the branch of Islam that
spread in Asia including the Turks that would go
on to form the mighty Ottoman Empire it's fair
to say that Islam has changed Persia but also
has not destroyed the uniqueness of the Persian
civilization no more than the invasion by Iranian
people destroyed elamite influence or the Greek
and parthan Conquest did eradicate the Persian
culture the caliphate that would take over over
the rashidan caliphate was the umay caliphate
while it was an Arab Empire first it also
contained multiple elements of Persian culture
as well and Drew a lot of its wealth and Manpower
from Persia and Mesopotamia it also adopted the
Persian Administration and Court protocol the umad
caliphate stretched at its peak in 750 ad from
Central Asia to the pinees mountains in the north
of modernday Spain the enormously overstretched
umaya caliphate soon started to fragment into
more manageable smaller Empires this was also
in part due to a split about who should succeed
Muhammad due to the religious nature of Muhammad's
Empire this split evolved into a religious split
as well Shia Muslims believe Muhammad appointed
Ali Muhammad's cousin as his successor Sunni
Muslims believed he did not as that Abu Bakr
appointed by a council of senior Muslims was
the rightful successor this resulted in a bitter
rivalry that is still alive to this day over time
this difference about political succession evolved
into differences in Theology and culture as well
Shia Islam would initially be most preeminent in
Egypt and North Africa nowadays Iran is considered
the leader of the Shia world it is often opposing
the rest of the Muslim World in majority Sunni
the umay caliphate would be replaced by
the abised caliphate it was formed with
the help of an Iranian General and overall would
progressively integrate better the old Persian
culture and administration to the Arab rulers and
their religion the abised would build Baghdad in
762 ad near the site of ancient Babylon the city
would see the building of the world's first paper
mill using Chinese inspired technology and
become an important center of learning for
the Muslim world it would study preserve and
copy Persian Roman and Greek texts the abids
would also trade in exchange with the rest of
the world and contribute to the spread in the
west of Asian inventions like the seant the number
zero or Gunpowder the Abid Empire would struggle
to maintain a grasp on a very large empire and
aggressively lose control over the most distant
Parts Morocco in the 830s Egypt in the 870s and
North Africa in the 920s from 945 to the 13th
century the area would become controlled by the
seljuk Turks coming from the Eurasian steps like
the multitude of Iranian tribes before them once
again the pattern of Nomads replacing a declining
Dynasty still hold true even of seljuk's rule
the abised stay naly in control of the empire
in practice the cels would control the state
and the Army but the Iranian would control the
administration the abised Empire is generally
considered as having been the engine behind the
Islamic Golden Age it was a period of scientific
Development building on previous Knowledge from
the Egyptian Persian Greek and Roman and on
the exchange of ideas with all the cultures
of Eurasia from Western Europe to India and
China this led to considerable progress in
various Fields like medicine philosophy astronomy
chemistry geometry physics especially Optics and
calculus with the invention of algebra a lot
of the progress done in that time was also
due to the work of minorities like zoroastrians
Christians and Jews excluded from political power
they could still use their talents as doctors
scientists and Engineers the abids were also
responsible for the production of some of the
more well-known Muslim Literature Like the 101
Knights Tales likely at first a translation in
Arabic of Persian texts with origin in Indian
literature additional folklore from Arabic Persian
Mesopotamian and Egyptian sources would be added
to it this is where iconic characters like alad
Sinbad or Alibaba come from as said before the
selic rule in practice did not disrupt the daily
functioning of the abised caliphate the regular
occurrence of Nomads invading and replacing the
previous Dynasty ruling over Persia would be
interrupted by the Mongol invasions they differed
from previous Nomads invasions by their scale and
brutality the Mongols would pillage and Destroy
most of the lands they conquered culminating with
the destruction of Baghdad in 1258 many more
cities than Baghdad were burned to the ground
and their civilians slaughtered the burning of
Baghdad the intellectual center of the Muslim
caliphate is considered the end of the Islamic
Golden Age a considerable amount of libraries
and other intellectual work as well as
mosques were burned another difference
between the Mongol invasion and previous Nomads
invasions was the widespread destruction of Kats
without these hardto build irrigation systems many
Urban centers and agricultural lands would become
uninhabitable Persia recovered a little under the
Mongol ilate that restored trade and repaired some
of the irrigation infrastructures during the
occupation the majority of the Mongols would
convert to Islam they would have a preference
for Sufism a sect of Islam with a predilection
for esoterism and mysticism in many ways it
Blended well with the pre pre-existing Mongols
animist or Buddhist beliefs just when Persia was
starting to recover two events would wreck the
region the first reaching Iran in 1349 which
would kill ultimately 30% of the population
the second was the invasion by timour the lame or
tamarlane in 1381 timour would be the last great
nomadic conqueror and also one of the most brutal
conquerors in history he got his nickname due to
injuries to his leg and two missing fingers
from Arrow wounds suffered in his youth his
tactic was simple he would ask for unconditional
surrender and nothing else if refused he would
kill or enslave everyone on his path including the
elderly women and children his campaign might have
killed as many as 17 million people a colossal
amount equivalent to 5% of the world popul
at the time at the time many believed him
to be a forerunner of the apocalypse and
maybe the horsemen of war in a paradox when
considering his genocidal policies tamur was
also a great patron of the Arts especially
architecture in poetry built on murder and
violence the tamur Empire would fail less than
a century after ur's conquests Pria would be
partially ruled successfully by other nomadic
tribes onwards from 1452 2 ad the black sheep
turkman or kakoen Lou would be followed by
the white sheep turkman or AK kenlou in 1467
ad the destruction and Chaos brought by the
success of Mongols invasions had maybe for the
first time in millenniums durably shattered the
unity of Persia including its Iranian Heartland
the political disorder gave space for religious
movements to grow in popularity and restore order
the most influential of them were of Shia
inspiration and the dominance of Shia Islam
in Iran dates to this period Shah Ismael was a
religious leader and Noble of mixed descent with
his ancestors turkoman Kurdish Greek and Georgian
in a way this made him a perfect ruler for a land
that had been conquered and assimilated so many
diverse cultures into its own unique Temple
similarly the nent Iranian style Shia Islam
would quickly integrate many Sufi orders into
Shia Islam this would increase permanently the
theological difference between Iranian shiism
and Arabic sunnism between 1501 and 1511 sha
Ismail would have reconstituted a Persian Empire
with familiar borders including Iran the Caucasus
Turkmenistan part of Afghanistan and some control
of over Mesopotamia the main struggle for the
safavid Empire would be their powerful Western
neighbor the Ottoman Empire while Iran was overrun
by tamur and other nomadic tribes the Turks had
created a powerful Empire in Anatolia that would
succeed in the century old goal of the Muslims
Empire to conquer Constantinople the Ottomans also
controlled the Balkans Greece the lant and Egypt
at its peak it would extend into North Africa and
Ukraine and put Vienna Under Siege twice together
the Ottomans the safavids and the mugal empires
would form the so-called Islamic gunpowder Empires
their expansion and armies were heavily based on
the early Mastery of gunpowder they would form
stable Rich Innovative and expansionist Empires
the safavid empire was a meritocratic society
where people might inherit the position of their
father but only only if they prove worthy the
safavids would have relatively friendly relations
with the Mughal as they were separated by the
harsh mountains of Afghanistan and Pakistan on the
opposite the safavid and Ottomans would regularly
Clash over the control of Mesopotamia the Caucasus
and East Anatolia this rivalry with the Ottomans
contributed to Friendly relations with European
powers the safavids under sha abas first the great
would trade with the Dutch East India Company
and even establish an alliance with the Austrian
habsburgs aboss took back from the Ottomans
bagad Eastern Anatolia and Georgia by 1618 this
military success had been made possible due to the
modernization of the army following the model of
the British Army and under the instructions
of Sir Robert Shirley the relationship with
England was well established and it was with help
from the British royal Navy that Shaw would kick
out the port Portuguese from Bahrain and Hormuz
Europe would also import from Persia the famous
Persian carpets silk and other textiles in
general living standards were equivalent
to Europeans at least for the commoners however
Western visitors would notice fertile lands not
being cultivated blaming it on poor governance and
a lack of interest in agriculture from the ruling
Elite many monuments in Iran standing to this date
Trace back to the Soph ofid Pur period including
the several Monumental and richly decorated
mosques in Isfahan Isfahan would be a center of
learning but by the mid 17th century Islamic
culture had started to stagnate the emphasis
on respecting older knowledge had turned into
a reluctance to innovate or challenge previous
assumptions this would in turn put the country
at a disadvantage to Europe which had started
to adopt the the scientific method successors of
aboss the first would prove a lot less competent
and are remembered in history as more interested
in wine and women than ruling their empire this
gave the neighboring Powers increased Ambitions
including Russia which had now been a growing
power for two centuries and actively expanding
to the east and south the Russian Empire under
Peter the Great would conquer Iran's Caucasian
territories in 1723 the regions of Afghanistan and
Pakistan would also rebel against their Persian
Masters meanwhile the Ottomans would also carve
out a part of the Iranian territory the Treaty of
Constantinople in 1724 would briefly split Iranian
Territory between the Russians and the Ottomans by
1735 most of these territories would be returned
to Iran after a rebellion and a new Iran autom War
The Man Behind the restoration of an independent
Iran in 1735 nater sha would then attack India and
pillage Delhi using the stolen riches to finance
the reconquest of land long lost to the Ottomans
over time he would turn into a paranoid and cruel
ruler when he was assassinated in 1747 Persia
controlled again the Caucasus Mesopotamia and
parts of Anatolia what followed was a long period
of Anarchy and Civil War the winner of the Civil
War who would found the kajar Dynasty in 1796
was AA Muhammad Khan his Reign would be marked
by the goal to reestablish Iranian control over
the caucuses like many other countries in that
period Iran would struggle to be independent when
faced with increasingly powerful industrialized
and aggressive European colonial empires after aam
Muhammed Iran would permanently lose control over
the region to Russia in the two Russo Persian
Wars of 1804 to 1813 and 1826 to 1828 and this
was despite Russia fighting a very destructive war
against Napoleon at the same time many Caucasian
Muslims would refuse to live under Orthodox
Russian Rule and migrate to Iran later on the
ruling Elite would essentially sell the country
to foreign power influence especially bidding
Russia and England against each other England
the colonial ruler of India was increasingly on
a collision course with Russia over the division
of Central Asia and Persia several revolutions
from 1905 to 1911 would weaken the rule of the
Sha and increase demands for democratization
this would turn the old aristocratic Persia
into the Iranian modern state but also leave
open to foreign domination in 1907 the Anglo
Russia convention would divide Iran into two
zones of influence the blatant disregard for the
locals opinion on the matter illustrates the loss
of autonomy of Persia by that period foreign
powers controlled the various factions fighting
for control of the country the discovery of oil in
1908 contributed to increasing corruption and did
little to help modernize and develop the country
in 1921 the UK would be struggling against the
Soviet Union for control over Iran and its
strategically important oil reserve for the
Soviets access to the Indian Ocean and the ability
to threaten English colonies in the Middle East
and India was equally strategically important
with support from the British Rak KH would
take power and establish the palavi dynasty
which would rule until the 1979 Revolution
rakan would establish an authoritarian Nationalist
and militaristic government with a doctrine of
secularism and anti-communism still the company
modernizes quickly the authoritarian nature of
the regime also made it prone to corruption
and oppression the secularism of the Shaw's
regime was resented by a devout population in
majority Muslim the tentative to westernized
was also poorly accepted including changes
in clothing style women's Liberation and
many socioeconomic reforms during World War II
the Iranian government was initially tempted to
side with the Germans in response the Soviet and
English forces invaded the country it would be a
major Transportation road for supplying the Soviet
Union with americanmade military equipment under
the Lend Le agreement the post-war period would be
marked by instability with the unresolved question
of the relationship with Western Powers the new
sha Muhammad Resa initially ruled in a way that
could have prefigured the Country turning it into
a constitutional monarchy akin to the UK or modern
Spain the relationship between the Sha and the
democratically elected prime minister Muhammad
madik would turn sour when the Prime Minister
nationalized the British controlled oil industry
madik was removed from Power in 1952 before
being restored under popular pressure he would
be permanently removed from power in 1953 due
to a USA and UK sponsored coup from 1953 to 1973
Iran's oil resources would be managed by Western
companies in 1973 in the midst of the70s oil shock
the Sha would take back control of Iranian oil
and use the money to modernize and build a more
powerful [Music] Army in 1979 the country would be
taken over by the Islamic revolution transforming
the country into the Islamic Republic it is
today communist activists that contributed
to the success of the Revolution would be quickly
purged resulting in poor relations between Islamic
Iran and atheist communist Soviets Iran would cut
all relations with the West with the Iran hostage
crisis of focal point one year later Saddam
Hussein hoped to profit from the disorder in
Iran to expand Iraq's territories especially in
oil rich areas Iraq was supported by the USA the
USSR France the UK Egypt and the Arab countries
currently Iran is under sanctions from the West
for its nuclear program regionally it's exerting
influence over traditional Persian space like
Iraq Syria and Lebanon but also Yemen it's also
improving its relations with China and Russia and
is joining China international organizations
like the bricks and the Shanghai cooperation
organization the Persian Empire Today is
known for being one of the most dominant
and Powerful Empires throughout the course of
history over thousands of years the Persians
have made numerous integral contributions
to the world from industry to culture